1. The procedure:The Environment Minister could have made things much easier for herself by giving the dry stabilizer process developed by the Hessian medium-sized company Hofmann in the 1990s a real chance. After pre-shredding in closed boxes with filtered exhaust air, the unsorted wet residual waste undergoes a one-week brief rotting process. In addition to a volume reduction, the resulting heat causes drying to about 15° without the addition of external energy.

As a result, the process extracts an average of 270 kg of water from a ton of household waste and household-type commercial waste and enables the mechanical separation of around 210 kg of non-combustible fractions. Ferrous and non-ferrous metals with a corresponding depletion of heavy metals and inert material (stones and sand for the construction industry, glass sorted by color, etc.) are separated and sent for further recycling. These can be further mechanically differentiated with the aim of material recycling (glass, e.g. sorted by colour) and useful for different purposes. In this respect, there is a high degree of flexibility. As a result of the generally further developed sorting techniques, it has experienced a significant increase. Plastics can also be - if necessary. with sub-sorting and corresponding lowering of the calorific value of the stabilizer. As a rule, this leaves around 520 kg of storable refuse-derived fuel. with a correspondingly increased calorific value of between 15 and 18 MJ/kg, i.e. slightly above that of dried lignite. The CO2 emission factor is 24 g/kg, i.e. less than a quarter of that of lignite.

2. The possible uses:Hofmann installed an EVA energy recovery plant at the site of the pilot plant and, using a quarter of the stabilizer produced there, supplied the entire waste disposal plant with electricity and heat. He was able to sell the remaining three quarters in cement works and as a substitute for coal without any problems. The five other German plants also had no significant sales problems. For example, the 42,500 t of refuse-derived fuel produced annually in Dresden were processed into methanol in the secondary raw materials center at Schwarze Pumpe SVZ, a chemical base material that was in demand then and still is today. The SVZ saw great opportunities in hydrogen production.

With its wide range of promising application and development perspectives, the dry stabilizer process thus created attractive earnings opportunities for a not insignificant part of waste management. It turned out to be a serious threat to the DSD, which had built up a multi-billion dollar market with government help. Those responsible for traditional waste incineration also faced stiff competition. In this environment, Hofmann had to deal with quite powerful headwinds.

3. The beacon of hope is blocked:Hofmann was given no state-opened legal opportunity to play to his strengths. Nevertheless, in cooperation with a financially strong regional energy supplier as a partner, he achieved a surprisingly quick market entry in Germany and, with a delay, also in other European countries. However, the glorious future prospects soon came to an abrupt end for him and the German market. A large energy supplier, which itself operated classic waste incineration plants, acquired a majority in the new partner through share purchases, and the latter withdrew from the cooperation with Hofmann. The groundbreaking innovation came to an abrupt end. The medium-sized company found it difficult to sell its patents to avoid insolvency. The new patent holders were forced to relocate their activities abroad. In Asia in particular, and above all in China, huge systems of unimaginable dimensions are being operated.

4. Politics opposes progress:In one of the A.R.T. Trier under the direction of Prof. Pretz from the RWTH Aachen University in 2010, the light fraction collected in parallel in the catchment area was added to the domestic waste and the mixed material was subjected to stabilization. The subsequent sorting separated 97% of the plastics (https://www.artgmbh-trier.de/eo/cms?_sprache=de&_bereich=artikel&_aktion=detail&idartikel=245487).

The Federal Environment Minister, who had the results presented to him in person, showed no inclination to give progress a chance. It would also have been difficult for the Chancellor to convey that. The main argument was the reference to the qualitative impairment of the recyclables due to the initial mixing with household waste. A problem that also arises with the separate collection with its misjudgments and also found a solution.

5. The size of the energy industry: With a total of almost 15 million tons of household waste and household-type waste
more than 7 million tons of dry stabilizer can be obtained and the use of lignite for energy production and the dependence on Russian gas and Russian oil can be reduced in this magnitude. Both the quantity and, above all, the calorific value can be dramatically increased by adding the 2.7 million tonnes of LVP (minus ferrous and non-ferrous metals) with a calorific value of 40 MJ/kg.

6. The merging of the recording systems:This almost forces the two household collection systems to be brought together and dried together with subsequent mechanical sorting. The quotas currently specified by the Packaging Act were easily met. The operator of a Stabilat plant has access to the entire LVP quantity.

7. The climate protection and cost consequences:The abolition of LVP separate collection would trigger significant savings in diesel fuel with corresponding decarbonization. The routes of the dual systems are largely identical to those of municipal household waste collection. Likewise the breakpoints. The provision of containers, their administration and the organization of disposal as well as the mechanical separation of waste and their transport to the municipal waste disposal company would also be eliminated.

8. Decarbonizing cities: By including the procedure proposed here, the currently projected goals of a decarbonization of cities and regions could be increased again in a sustainable manner. The waste-to-energy plants (MHKW) are to be supplemented by a plant for the production of hydrogen and at the same time the vehicle fleet is to be converted to this fuel. The serving collection vehicles can then be supplied with hydrogen on the spot at the start of the new tour. A MHKW operated with dry stabilizer and the elimination of the parallel LVP recording would further optimize the push towards climate protection in the long term.