Linking the take-back obligation and product responsibility: For Federal Environment Minister Töpfer, it was both a challenge and a legitimacy to prescribe a pilot responsibility for the packaging industry to limit resource consumption and to concretise this through waste disposal based on the recycling economy. The market area is manageable, what is happening in it has a clearly defined function and the product concerned usually has a limited lifespan. In other words: A particularly suitable part of the economy for testing market-based instruments for the ecological control of resource consumption.

The organization in detail:Retailers were obliged to take back the packaging waste they placed on the market and to return it to materials management in a high-quality form (if possible through material recycling). He was able to free himself from this obligation by paying license fees. First to the monopoly with the green dot and after its dissolution to the competing so-called system operators, the carriers of the dual system Germany (DSD) organized under private law. The payments should cover the separate collection and recycling of the materials used as well as the overhead for organizational processing. The IVB was free to recoup the expense with the usual surcharges when selling the packaged goods. This widespread responsibility could not go unnoticed.

The Töpfer concept in practice: After the disposal emergency was averted, the DSD continued and further developed the collection and recycling of glass and paper/cardboard/cardboard, which was successfully operated together with the municipal waste disposal authorities. It may not be clear whether the cooperation of the DSD was required for this. The cooperation with the local disposal companies was by no means without conflict. However, the situation is different with regard to lightweight packaging waste (LVP). Töpfer did not place the responsibility for the product packaging on the producers, so that they were and still are free - albeit within limits - to act more in a cost-oriented manner than on the usability of the product material used to be considered.
 
The motivation of the retail trade, to which responsibility has been imposed, is also not geared towards the disposal of empty containers. On the contrary: With the packaging, he primarily pursues a whole bundle of different functional functions. The protection of food from spoilage by extending the shelf life and naming an end date should be emphasized by many in advance. The general protection against damage during transport and storage as well as the use for instructions for use and an image-cultivating design etc. should also be mentioned. Not to forget the anti-theft device. All this is very far removed from a market-oriented usability of the packaging material. In a comparison, however, one can assume that the resource-saving benefit of the measures clearly exceeds the resources used. Their sales-promoting effect, in turn, naturally steers the main interest of retailers in this direction. The responsibility for the product that Töpfer strives for ranks below that.

The controlling influence of the DSD by means of the structure of the license fees has proven to be extremely inefficient and the exploitation successes were anything but convincing. A large part of the trade tried to evade the license payment with a lot of imagination through a variety of tricky considerations. As a result, the cost burden for the companies that correctly met their obligations - in some cases even directly competing - was increased accordingly. This was based on the principle "The honest is the stupid". The arguments about this, which were also publicly held with all violence, have dragged on for years. For example, the LVP collection volume has at times dramatically exceeded the licensed volume.

DSD was threatened with financial collapse over a long period of time as a result of free-riding. Added to this was the limited use of the yellow collection containers by the population. In the metropolitan areas in particular, 50% of misthrows were registered. It could also not be denied that the materials that were nevertheless recorded could only be recycled to a small extent. The DSD fell far short of the recycling quota of 64% of packaging placed on the market, as stipulated in the Packaging Ordinance. At no time did he succeed in freeing the trade from its obligation to take back products. The goal of a circular economy was basically dead. Looked at in the light of day, the trade would have remained obliged to continue to take back empty packaging, despite proper licensing. In practice, however, politicians have not drawn the necessary conclusions, although the emergency disposal situation had already been averted.