
The highly problematic rescue of the system:Rather, the Environment Minister and later Chancellor felt compelled to sit on the quasi-dead horse in order to revive him. Possibly out of fear that the failure of the LVP division would drag the functioning glass and paper/cardboard/cardboard areas into the abyss.

With the amendment to the Packaging Ordinance, she has drastically reduced the ambitious percentage recycling obligation laid down by her predecessor. In addition, it reacted to the low participation of the population in separate collection by replacing the reference value "put on the market" with "recorded" quantity. She gave this cumulative quota reduction retroactive effect in order to at least partially free the matter from the stigma of illegality. In this context, the legal recognition of the thermal treatment of residual waste in classic waste incinerators as recycling proved to be particularly helpful. The prerequisite was a heat extraction of 11MJ/kg. This officially called into question the usefulness of the separate recording. Why should one throw the yoghurt pot - possibly rinsed - into the yellow sack if it would otherwise end up in the same incinerator along with the household waste in a different way.
 
The continued lack of prospects:The subsequent amendments to the Packaging Ordinance and its replacement by a Packaging Act (VerpackG) essentially resulted in a significantly improved organization for enforcing licensing and recycling targets for all areas of packaging waste. The omission of the minimum energy decoupling for recognition as energetic recovery when using LVP in classic waste incineration plants improves the visual impression of the statistics, but does not mean any significant ecological progress. Also, contrary to the initial impression given by the figures, “the amount sent for recycling” in no way means that in the end they also document actual recycling. in this respect, however, the EU has since corrected the figures downwards.

The statistics published by the UBA document great efforts to achieve precision by showing numbers up to the decimal point. However, the impression is put into perspective the moment you realize that the percentages do not refer to the IVB quantities, but to the materials recorded. Above all, however, neither the effort for the recording nor for its organizational processing have found their way into the figures. Against the background of the climate crisis, this is indispensable.

For example, B. Herrmann/Schwarzmann describe the status of packaging recycling as follows: 89% of the plastic packaging put into circulation is made from new material and the remaining 5% from equivalent and 6% from inferior recyclate (AbfallR 2022, 74). This description is not convincing as long as it is not accompanied by information about the effort required for the collection, the separation of the wrong throws, the cleaning, the processing and the resulting losses as well as the transport to the various places. It may well turn out that inferior material recycling proves to be ecological due to minimal effort. This makes meaningful documentation considerably more complicated. However, it is indispensable and must then take place at least approximately in order to only carry out recycling that really relieves the planet as a whole.