1. Waste as an energy source:With waste, modern life produces a continuously renewed source of valuable materials. Reducing it is one of the main goals of modern waste policy. However, this can only be done step by step and based on current knowledge it can never end at zero. It would therefore be important not to regard waste as a phenomenon that society tries to get rid of as discreetly and cheaply as possible. The traditional concept of disposal still harbors mental tendencies in this direction. It would be helpful to have a terminology that underlines the aspect of the intrinsic value of waste and suggests exploiting it to the full.

Modern ways of thinking from the fundus of environmental and resource protection tend to develop meaningful uses with as little effort as possible. Nothing justifies the thermal destruction of inadequately dried household waste and household-type commercial waste in conventional incineration with high energy losses. It moves in an environment in which the municipalities, unless they are the operators themselves, act as a kind of petitioner with the request to get rid of their waste just in time with high co-payments.

In a first step, the process of dry stabilization produces storable fuel that can be used to compensate for fluctuations in wind and solar power. The alternative fuel can also compete ecologically with lignite and help to oust it from electricity and heat generation in the long term. However, the stabilization also has the technical potential to generate usable materials from waste and to orientate the ejection to the requirements of the market. Political specifications are required for the possible uses in practice, which can also be combined. At least if incentives under waste law to withhold them from alternative fuels and channel them to other, more sustainable purposes.

2. The temporary turn towards energy recovery:In a large-scale study commissioned by the DSD, the Oeko-Institut found that the material recycling of packaging waste is ecologically significantly superior to the energetic use and that the advantage can be increased (https://www.gruener-punkt.de/de/ politik-verbaende-ngo/studie-oeko-institut, accessed on June 23, 2022). The assertion is constantly repeated in the above text and nowhere is it mentioned whether and to what extent the assessment is based on the inclusion of the entire effort including separate recording. That can stand there. There is currently no doubt about the need to use all the waste that is generated anyway as energetically as possible in order to eliminate the energy dependency, which threatens security policy, as quickly and as far as possible. This requires at least in 2023ff. exhausting all available options, including the less climate-friendly methods.

The necessity is likely to continue as long as the use of lignite for energy production can be reduced by about 1:1 and ultimately prevented with the help of the alternative fuel solid stabilizer. If the combustible LVP materials were included, the displacement per unit could be increased even more dramatically. Germany once set the official date for phasing out lignite as 2038. In the meantime, there is talk of 2030 and calls for further reductions in service life are becoming louder; its realization is by no means impossible, especially since it would be promoted with the help of the dry stabilizer. However, it would also be conceivable to expand the energy orientation to 100 percent climate-neutral energy production.

3. The merged collection creates flexibility:No preliminary clarifications are currently required for the constellations shown. As a technical precaution, the merging of the collection streams can already be designed in such a way that it does not lose its advantage through the exchange of the target substitute fuel for recycling and vice versa. The sorting cascade after drying can be aligned in terms of both energy and material. It enables technical constellations for short-term needs-based conversions. Therefore there is no reason to delay the adoption of the traditional separate collection of the LVP group. Plastics and all other materials that can be recycled in an ecologically responsible manner can already be specifically filtered out of dried household and household-type commercial waste using the current state of sorting technology.