1. The adaptation of the traditional organization:A legal rule that was limited to averting a disposal emergency could have been done away with relatively easily once the problem had been successfully resolved. However, the principle of producer liability has left its mark, making reversal extremely difficult. It would be essential to continue the DSD and the ZSVR, which is organized as a foundation, with all their previous functions. At least that has the charm of a continued existence of the hard-won organization with the experience of its actors in dealing with packaging waste. The ZSVR would probably be in a better position than any other body to organize the difficult conversion process sensibly. And above all, the regulation of the associated financing issues. The two or three remaining operators of Stabilatanlagen could - if necessary. after expanding their operations - as pioneers test the changeover together with the ZSVR and contribute their experiences.

2. Conversion through remunicipalisation:The switch to Stabilat or something similar cannot happen overnight. Not even at a certain legally prescribed point in time. The new authorities require different lengths of time to convert their systems. It will take years, even if the traffic light government should quickly implement the announced general reduction in approval times. The changeover can only take place gradually and at the pace at which the individual municipal plants are converted to dry stabilizer or comparable and start working. It can only be fully completed when the last stabilizer facility in Germany is commissioned. It makes sense for the remaining parts of the packaging pallet to be brought back under the full responsibility of the municipalities at this point.

3. An interim solution:The remunicipalisation suggested here would mean, at least in the transitional phase, that the bodies responsible for waste disposal would take on the role of the respective system operator as soon as they had completed the conversion to optimized household waste treatment. With the transfer of tasks, the payment claims would then also have to be transferred in approximately the amount in which they would have been granted to the replaced system operators against the DSD. You can picture it in such a way that the citizens of the respective municipality get back the money with which they have to continue to finance the DSD with the purchase of packaged goods. Financing via the shop price cannot be split and must be retained until the last municipality has completed the changeover.

The conversion effort would be a huge challenge. The investments required should not be underestimated. Also financially. It would be conceivable constellations that municipalities get together for joint projects. It would also be conceivable for system operators to get involved. The municipalities could manage the co-collection with significantly less effort than the system operators the separate collection. They would also have the opportunity to get rid of the refuse-derived fuel for a significantly lower co-payment than before their household and household-type commercial waste. Incidentally, its fee will become significantly more expensive in the foreseeable future, because the incinerator will soon be used for the CO2 fee as well as the alternative fuel used in the cement industry etc. up to now. The federal government would have to consider whether it makes sense to register the project for the EU's recovery and resilience facility.