1. Compatibility with the Basic Law: a) Landfill protection:There was simply no alternative to the idea of diverting at least parts of the waste stream past landfills and incineration plants by means of the Packaging Ordinance in order to avert a disposal emergency. Meaningfulness was “written on her forehead”. This also applied to the separate recording of the materials targeted for this purpose. According to the state of development of waste management at that time, it was a mandatory prerequisite for diverting the partial flow with subsequent ecologically acceptable disposal outside of landfills and classic waste incineration. The fact that the associated costs were actually imposed on the population via the retail price of the packaged goods also made it compatible with the Basic Law. The same applies here as to other requirements that have to be met by business in the general interest and are then included in the price of services and goods.

b) Link to product stewardship:The compatibility with the Basic Law was also not eliminated by the organizational linking of the activity with the aim of anchoring product responsibility in a sub-area of economic life by way of example. This resulted in neither an increase in costs nor stricter requirements for the participation of the population. Over time, however, this changed after the danger of the impending disposal emergency had been overcome. The original requirement for separate collection was no longer applicable and the trade was not the right contact for producer liability. He was not a producer and only had indirect opportunities to influence production (see II.3a.). The positive effects were correspondingly small.

c) Proportionality of the intervention in economic activity:The misgivings were reinforced by the development of a superior, partially competing, private-law process. It gave the process a new constitutional quality. In this respect, reference is made to the statements under IV. The state's right to regulate economic processes is subject to the principle of least interference. This means that civil liberties may only be restricted to the extent necessary to achieve a specific goal. However, given the clear advantages of the dry stabilizer process, this is obviously not being adhered to. This removed the constitutional legitimacy for maintaining the separation requirement. As a result, the separate collection-based Packaging Ordinance was already incompatible with the Basic Law. The 1998 amendment to the Packaging Ordinance described above marks the turning point in time.

With the amendment of the Closed Substance Cycle Waste Management Act in 2015, the separation of recyclable waste became a legal obligation for packaging waste as well. Non-compliance can then be punished under certain conditions. It was not possible to restore constitutional conformity in this way. The fact of excessive use could not be eliminated by a simple legal regulation. The presented unconstitutionality remained and remains unaffected.
 
2. Compatibility with European law: The Waste Framework Directive, which was amended as part of the EU legislative package on the circular economy, tightens the obligation of the EU member states to ensure the separate collection of waste generated in households. However, this commandment, which includes the LVP parliamentary group, is not violated by the procedure advocated here. By combining the parallel collection systems with subsequent drying, the amount of recyclable materials is increased by mechanical sorting. This achieves exactly what the amendment aims to achieve. Conversely, a shoe is made of it. The VerpackVO from 1991 did not live up to its intention of separate collection. Despite 30 years of continuous optimization efforts, it fell far short of its resource policy objective with regard to the disposal of LVP waste. In the concrete constellation, the maintenance of separate collection causes the resource policy opposite of what the EU Waste Framework Directive strives for through separate collection.
 
IX. Extension to Europe: Finally, one must not forget in this context that Germany has had a strong influence on the development of European waste management and is largely responsible for the fact that European waste law has been trimmed in its direction. The individual member states have so far only partially followed the mandatory regulations. Due to its previous behavior, Germany would be obliged to do everything in its power to promote a U-turn towards joint collection with subsequent drying and efficient sorting, also at European level. In view of the market volume that is at stake here, this would not just be an inconsequential contribution to the further development of energy and resource policy in waste management. Rather, it would be an important step towards accelerating the exit from diverse energy dependency and on the way to sustainable resource management and, above all, climate-neutral energy production.